Title: NSF-Funded Researchers Discover Evidence of Microscopic Life at the
         South Pole
Date:  July 6, 2000



Media contact:
July 6, 2000
Peter West
NSF PR 00-48
703) 306-1070/pwest@nsf.gov

          NSF-FUNDED RESEARCHERS DISCOVER EVIDENCE
           OF MICROSCOPIC LIFE AT THE SOUTH POLE

     In a finding that may extend the known limits of life on
Earth, researchers supported by the National Science Foundation
(NSF) have discovered evidence that microbes may be able to
survive the heavy doses of ultraviolet radiation and the extreme
cold and darkness of the South Pole.

    The team's findings, published in Applied and Environmental
Microbiology, the journal of the American Society for
Microbiology, indicate that a population of active bacteria, some
of which have DNA sequences that align closely with species in
the genus Deinococcus, exists at the South Pole in the austral
summer. A similar species lives elsewhere in Antarctica, but the
discovery of microbes at the Pole may mean that the bacteria have
become uniquely adapted to the extreme conditions there,
including a scarcity of liquid water.

    A species in the genus Deinococcus was first discovered in
cans of irradiated meat in the 1950's, and is able to withstand
extreme dryness and large doses of radiation.  It is possible
that the related bacteria from the South Pole may also possess
these characteristics.

     "While we expected to find some bacteria in the South Pole
snow, we were surprised that they were metabolically active and
synthesizing DNA and protein at local ambient temperatures of -12
to -17 Celsius (10.4 to 1.4 degrees Fahrenheit)," said Edward J.
Carpenter, of the State University of New York at Stony Brook,
who headed the research team. "Before attempting to publish the
results, we wanted to be certain that the data were correct and
were able to duplicate the observations in a second field season
during January 2000."

    Antarctica was once part of a supercontinent called
Gondwanaland and drifted into its present position only about 60
million years ago. Deinococcus, however, is thought to be one of
the earlier branches in the bacterial tree, and is much older
than Antarctica in its present location.  It is therefore
unlikely that it evolved in Antarctica.

    If the team's conclusions prove true, the discovery not only
has important implications for the search for life in other
extreme environments on Earth, but also for the possibility that
life -- at least at the microscopic level -- may exist elsewhere
in the solar system.  Furthermore, the snow bacteria may possess
unique enzymes and membranes able to cope with a subzero
existence.

    The team was careful to take samples at the edge of the
clean-air sector at Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station to prevent
contamination of the samples by bacteria from human habitation.
The containers of bacteria were flown, still frozen, within 24
hours to the Albert P. Crary Science and Engineering Center at
NSF's McMurdo Station for analysis. In examining the snowmelt,
the researchers found coccoid and rod-shaped bacteria, some of
which appeared to be dividing.

    The findings by Carpenter and his colleagues, Senjie Lin, of
the University of Connecticut, and Douglas Capone, of the
University of Southern California, also may be significant
because a separate team of NSF-supported investigators reported
that ice cores taken at Lake Vostok, deep in the Antarctic
interior, indicate the presence of microbes in what is suspected
to be a vast pool of liquid water thousands of meters below the
Antarctic ice sheet. That finding may have similar implications
for extending the known limits of life.

                               -NSF-
 For more information see http://www.nsf.gov/home/crssprgm/lexen/